[← Back to index](1.%20index.md) | [← Back to utilities](4.%20utilities.md)

# Database package

Database package contains modules that handle any database related action from checking dependencies, 
mapping database objects in real time that framework apps use to the different DML operations.

Current modules are:
- main.py
- loaders.py


## main.py module
Content:
- [Database class](#database-class)
  - [Database class DML methods](#database-dml-methods)
    - [query](#database-query)
    - [execute](#database-execute)

### Database class <a id="database-class"></a>
Initializing this class you will create and instance for communication with database that you 
forwarded to settings argument. 

> Check [3. settings.md](3.%20settings.md) to she how settings class should be configured.

Recommended initialization of Database class 
```python
from data_collector.utilities.database.main import Database
from data_collector.settings.main import MainDatabaseSettings

database = Database(MainDatabaseSettings())
```

Now that we have instance of Database we can now create session with database

```python
from data_collector.utilities.database.main import Database
from data_collector.settings.main import MainDatabaseSettings

database = Database(MainDatabaseSettings())
with database.create_session() as session:
    # do things with session
    pass
```

Note: if you work with multiply session you should name session with appropriate name to 
distinguish them easier

### Database class DML methods <a id="database-dml-methods"></a>
##### query (self, session, *models, map_objects=True, track_models=None): <a id="database-query"></a>

Wrapper around session.query() method that enables mapping ORM objects in
realtime if enabled and in same time user performs same operations like with 
original .query() method except forwarding session is needed.

Arguments:
- map_objects - when database.settings.map_objects is True, you can set for this 
specific query to False if you don't want to map the database object
- track_models - is used usually in batch by other database class methods 
preventing mapping same models multiply times reducing unnecessary calls to the database.

Regular use
```python
from sqlalchemy import and_
from data_collector.tables import Apps
from data_collector.utilities.database.main import Database
from data_collector.settings.main import MainDatabaseSettings


database = Database(MainDatabaseSettings())
with database.create_session() as session:
    app_filter = and_(Apps.last_run.isnot(None))
    records = database.query(session, Apps).filter(app_filter)
```

##### execute (self, sql_text, session): <a id="database-execute"></a>
Unlike session.execute(), this class method is intentionally limited to execute
only stored procedures, functions, or package procedures.
Automatically registers used routine in AppDbObjects if database.app_id is specified and 
database.settings.map_objects is set to True.

```python
from data_collector.utilities.database.main import Database
from data_collector.settings.main import MainDatabaseSettings

database = Database(MainDatabaseSettings())
with database.create_session() as session:
    database.execute('call public.sp_testit()', session)
```


##### merge (objs, session, filters, archive_col='archive', delete=False, update=True, stats=False, archive_date=None, logger=None, company_key='sha')
Merge class method is used for comparing new objects and old objects. 
New objects represent data that is fetched in current runtime and old objects are those that are already existing in database.

**Old objects are separated into two states:**
- active state (archive is null, represents currently last up-to date version of the record/s dataset)
- historical objects (archive is not null, represents previous versions of the records enabling to have history of changes)

**Arguments:**
- **objs** - A single ORM object or list of ORM objects (typically from an external source like an WEB, API, File).
Each object must have a unique field (default: 'sha') for comparison.
- **session** - it is mandatory to provide The SQLAlchemy session to use
- **filters** - SQLAlchemy filter to narrow the selection of records from the database. If not provided, all records from the inferred table will be fetched.
- **archive_col** - The name of the column used to mark a record as archived.
Archived record = history record no longer active on source. Default is 'archive'. Only relevant if `update=True`.
- **delete** - If True, records missing from `objs` will be permanently deleted from the database. Mutually exclusive with `update`.
- **update** - If True, records missing from `objs` will have their `archive_col` updated with the current time or `archive_date`. Mutually exclusive with `delete`.
- **stats** - If True returns Stats class with statistics of how many objects have been inserted, archive or deleted and also inserted objects that now contain id of row in database
- **archive_date** - A specific datetime to use when marking records as archived. If not provided, the current time is used.
- **logger** - Option to forward app logger instead using Database logger. This connects logging events to the caller (the app). Database default loging is sufficient when:
  - We don't need events to be connected to specific app
  - For debugging purposes
- **compare_key** - One or more attribute names (str or list/tuple of str) used to uniquely identify each object. 
The field is used to determine uniqueness (default is 'sha') for comparison between new and existing objects.

```python
from datetime import datetime
from sqlalchemy import (and_)
from data_collector.tables import ExampleTable
from data_collector.utilities.database.main import Database
from data_collector.settings.main import MainDatabaseSettings
from data_collector.utilities.functions.runtime import bulk_hash

database = Database(MainDatabaseSettings())
with database.create_session() as session:
    # Generating some initial data
    initial_data = [
        ExampleTable(company_id=100, person_id=123, name="John", surname="Doe", birth_date=datetime(1987, 9, 23)),
        ExampleTable(company_id=100, person_id=234, name="Mary", surname="Jaine", birth_date=datetime(2001, 8, 18)),
    ]

    # Adding hashing to the list objects
    initial_data = bulk_hash(initial_data)

    # Create filter to narrow down records you want to compare
    filters = and_(ExampleTable.company_id == 100)

    # Using merge to avoid insertion of same records if they already exist
    stats = database.merge(objs=initial_data, session=session, filters=filters, stats=True)

    # Showing results of merge
    database.logger.info(
        f"RESULTS: inserted:{stats.inserted}, archived:{stats.archived}, total records: {stats.number_of_records}")
```